ADR-104: Out-of-band state sync support (#801)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/architecture/adr-104-out-of-band-state-sync.md

# ADR 104: Out-of-band state sync support

## Changelog

- 2023-05-05: Initial Draft (@cason)

## Status

Accepted | Rejected | Deprecated | Superseded by

## Context

> 1. What is state sync?

From CometBFT v0.34, synchronizing a fresh node with the rest of the network
can benefit from [state sync][state-sync], a protocol for discovering,
fetching, and installing application snapshots.
State sync is able to rapidly bootstrap a node by installing a relatively
recent state machine snapshot, instead of replaying all historical blocks.

> 2. What is the problem?

With the widespread adoption of State sync to bootstrap nodes, however,
what should be one of its strengths - the ability to discover and fetch
application snapshots from peers in the p2p network - has turned out to be one
of its weakness.
In fact, while downloading recent snapshots is very convenient for new nodes
(clients of the protocol), providing snapshots to multiple peers (as servers of

> the protocol) is _bandwidth-consuming_.

Reviewer: i would say this is less of a bandwidth issue, but more of a reason of space and system requirements.

> before making a decision. It should contain a explanation on why the alternative
> approach(es) were not chosen.

### Strengthen p2p-based state sync

This ADR proposes a workaround for some limitations of the existing state sync
protocol, briefly summarized above. A more comprehensive and sustainable
long-term solution would require addressing such limitations.

From a protocol design point of view, probably the major limitation of state
sync is the lack of mechanisms to incentivize and reward established nodes that
provide "good" (updated and consistent) snapshots to peers.
The existing protocol is essentially altruistic: it assumes that established
nodes will support the bootstrap of fresh nodes without receiving anything in
return, other than having new peers joining their network.

From an operational point of view, the design of the p2p layer should take into
consideration the fact that not every node in the network is a "good" state
sync server. Fresh nodes, which need support for bootstrapping, should then be
able to discover peers in the network that are able or willing to provide
application snapshots.

> The implementation of this feature would require a more complex content-based

Reviewer 2: While I agree in principle with this statement, I am wondering, do we know whether in practice, at this moment, the set of nodes contacted via RPC for statesync is overlapping with the peers the node connects in any case? 

My reasoning is as follows:
1. If it overlaps, then we contact those peers anyways, and we could just have a peer signal whether it is also a statesync peer.. and then a node keeps track of those peers. 
2. If it does not, or it overlaps partially,we still need to pre-configure the set of peers to use for statesync, or at least have a special statesync seed node maybe that would give us useful peers for statesync. This might be a better/easier solution or complimentary to 1. because we still need to have enough statesyncing peers to be able to light client verify the headers.

Author: This is a good point, but I have not idea. In principle, nodes that we connect via RPC to implement the light client should have no relation with the peers a node has in the p2p layer. I didn't fully follow you reasoning from this point, though.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! I know that in principle they do not have to be related, was just wondering whether in practice they are. 

My other point was more with regards to the discussion on strengthening the p2p based statesync. We would still need to have a user manually configure state syncing peers or have a new special node that serves as a seed for statesyncing peers. The node discovers peers who provide snapshots and gossips those around.

operators are able to manually synchronize the application state from a running
node (it might be necessary to stop it) to a not-yet-started fresh node.

The main limitation of this approach is that it relies on the ability of node
operators to properly synchronize the application state between two nodes.
While experienced node operators are likely able to perform this operation in a
proper way, we have to consider a broader set of users and emphasize that it is
an operation susceptible to errors.
Furthermore, it is an operation that is, by definition, application-specific:
applications are free to manage their state as they see fit, and this includes
how and where the state is persisted.
Node operators would therefore need to know the specifics of each application
in order to adopt this solution.

## Decision

> This section records the decision that was made.
> It is best to record as much info as possible from the discussion that happened.
> This aids in not having to go back to the Pull Request to get the needed information.

State sync should support the bootstrap of new nodes from application snapshots

> obtained out-of-band by node operators.

Author: > State sync should support the bootstrap of new nodes from application snapshots

I would add "local" to this sentence? Otherwise, it is what State sync already does...

> obtained out-of-band by node operators.

Reviewer 2: Is out of band the same as local though? Local to me would mean the node had a snapshot it itself stored before. Out of band can mean it was just copied or obtanined in another manner.

> obtained out-of-band by node operators.

Author: I would say snapshots are local, for the sake of this definition. In general, I would say, from point 2. below, that they are local because obtained out-of-band?

> obtained out-of-band by node operators.

Reviewer 2: So local in this terminology is that the snapshots are applied from something eventually present on the node. Even though it originated from somewhere else. Sorry, this is just nit picking, nothing major :D

> obtained out-of-band by node operators.

Author: No, that's important. Recall that we should still pick a name for the PR :)

In other words, the following operation should be, in general terms, possible:

1. When configuring a new node, operators should be able to define where (e.g.,
   a local file system location) the client side of State sync should look for
   application snapshots to install or restore;
1. Operators should be able to instruct the server side of State sync on a
   running node to export application snapshots, when they are available,

>    to a given location (e.g., at the local file system);

Reviewer 3: Is it like a standalone command that'll connect to the p2p network and download the snapshots?

Author: No p2p, no network, no download. You instruct the node (e.g., via CLI command) to save a snapshot to disk.

Author: Of course, you can save it to a NFS shared disk, so you have network and a form of upload.

Reviewer 3: do you mean export a snapshot from the state running in the local node, not discover and download a snapshot from the network?

Author: Discovering and fetching snapshots is what the existing State sync does.

The proposed extension assumes that the node operator will discover and fetch the snapshot in some way and just point to the bootstrapping node (see item 1.) where to find the snapshot data.

Reviewer 3: yeah, but I'd like a standalone that simply download the snapshot from p2p network and save to disk, nothing more, but I guess this could be done on app side.

Reviewer: i think all this can be done app side, its simpler if its done app side since there may be gotchas in the app that are hard to account for

Author: > i think all this can be done app side

The point here is to create a way to a operator to instruct CometBFT to "export" a snapshot. The snapshot will still be produced by the application, using the same ABCI calls currently in use. The difference is that the snapshot retrieved from the application will not be sent through the network but instead saved to the file system.

Reviewer: this is already how state sync works for the sdk. Def adding support for some of the items here makes sense, but we would only need a way to bootstrap the node, like huang yi did. 

> Makes sense to rely on the app-side for fulfilling this requirement! Is there already app-side support for it?

we are merging the prs to make it work. they are all open and approved

Author: Links, please?

Reviewer: links to?

Author: > we are merging the prs to make it work. they are all open and approved

Reviewer 3: > > we are merging the prs to make it work. they are all open and approved
> 
> 

https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/16067

https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/16061

## Status

Accepted | Rejected | Deprecated | Superseded by

## Context

> 1. What is state sync?

From CometBFT v0.34, synchronizing a fresh node with the rest of the network
can benefit from [state sync][state-sync], a protocol for discovering,
fetching, and installing application snapshots.
State sync is able to rapidly bootstrap a node by installing a relatively
recent state machine snapshot, instead of replaying all historical blocks.

> 2. What is the problem?

With the widespread adoption of state sync to bootstrap nodes, however,
what should be one of its strengths - the ability to discover and fetch
application snapshots from peers in the p2p network - has turned out to be one
of its weakness.
In fact, while downloading recent snapshots is very convenient for new nodes
(clients of the protocol), providing snapshots to multiple peers (as servers of
the protocol) is _bandwidth-consuming_, especially without a clear incentive for
node operators to provide this service. 
As a result, the number of nodes in production CometBFT networks offering the
state sync service (i.e., servers offering snapshots) has been limited, which

> has rendered the service _fragile_ (from the client's point of view). It is very

Author: ```suggestion
has rendered the service _fragile_ (from the client's point of view). In other words, it is very
```

sync is the lack of mechanisms to incentivize and reward established nodes that
provide "good" (updated and consistent) snapshots to peers.
The existing protocol is essentially altruistic: it assumes that established
nodes will support the bootstrap of fresh nodes without receiving anything in
return, other than having new peers joining their network.

From an operational point of view, the design of the p2p layer should take into
consideration the fact that not every node in the network is a "good" state
sync server. Fresh nodes, which need support for bootstrapping, should then be
able to discover peers in the network that are able or willing to provide
application snapshots.
The implementation of this feature would require a more complex content-based
peer discovery mechanism.

However, while relevant, strengthening p2p-based state sync should be seen as
_orthogonal_ to the solution proposed in this ADR, which should have relevant use
cases even for an enhanced version of state sync.

### Manual application state transfer

The proposed [ADR 083][adr083]/[ADR 103][adr103] inspired the discussions that
led to this ADR. At first glance, their proposal might look identical to the

> solution discussed here. The main distinction is that their proposal does not
> involve installing application snapshots, but relies on node operators to
> manually synchronize the application state.

Reviewer 4: Nit: adding emphasis here.

```suggestion
solution discussed here. The main distinction is that these older proposals do not
involve installing application _snapshots_, but rely on node operators to
manually synchronize the application _state_.
```

// PathChunk generates a snapshot chunk path.
func (s *Store) PathChunk(height uint64, format, chunk uint32) string

```

In order to dump a snapshot, an application needs to retrieve all the chunks stored at a certain path. 

**CometBFT state bootstrap**

In addition to managing snapshots, it is neccessary to bootstrap (setup) the state and block store of CometBFT
in order for CometBFT to continue with block sync and consensus after state sync. 
At the moment of writing this ADR, there is no command line in CometBFT that supports this.
Thus application developers have to, within their bootstraping command:

- Create a state and block store
- Launch a light client to verify the snapshot headers
- Use the light client's `State` and `Commit` functions to 
retrieve the proper state, verify the `AppHash` and retrieve the `LastCommit`.
- Save the retrieved values into the state and block stores. 

This code is essentially what the existing implementation of the statesync reactor does, once state syncing is complete 
minus the functions that apply the snapshot chunks (as this has already been done offline). 

> ## CometBFT based local state sync

Reviewer 4: This should be H3.

```suggestion
### CometBFT based local state sync
```

CometBFT's block store and state store accordingly.

The distinction, therefore, lies in the way which the state of the application
from a running node is transferred to the new node to be bootstrapped.
Instead of relying on application snapshots, produced by the application but
handled by state sync, [ADR 083][adr083]/[ADR 103][adr103] assumes that node
operators are able to manually synchronize the application state from a running
node (it might be necessary to stop it) to a not-yet-started fresh node.

The main limitation of the approach in [ADR 083][adr083]/[ADR 103][adr103] 
is that it relies on the ability of node
operators to properly synchronize the application state between two nodes.
While experienced node operators are likely able to perform this operation in a
proper way, we have to consider a broader set of users and emphasize that it is
an operation susceptible to errors.
Furthermore, it is an operation that is, by definition, application-specific:
applications are free to manage their state as they see fit, and this includes
how and where the state is persisted.
Node operators would therefore need to know the specifics of each application

> in order to adopt this solution.

Reviewer 5: Somewhere in this paragraph, I would also mention the risk of data corruption (e.g. in a manually transferred DB) going undetected with the manual process in ADR103

Reviewer 2: I think the actual risk is that the oeprator has to read the applications DB, then dump the contenst, without knowing the exact format of the application's snapshot DB. But def something to add.

chose to implement local state sync differently, or implement only a subset of the functionalities
implemented by the SDK.

This solution exposes a command line interface enabling a node to manipulate the snapshots
including dumping existing snapshots to an exportable format, loading, restoring and deleting exported snapshots,
as well as a command to bootstrap the node by resetting CometBFT's state and block store. 

The SDK exposes the following commands for snapshot manipulation:

```script

delete      Delete a snapshot from the local snapshot store
dump        Dump the snapshot as portable archive format
export      Export app state to snapshot store
list        List local snapshots
load        Load a snapshot archive file into snapshot store
restore     Restore app state from a snapshot stored in the local snapshot store

```

and the following command to bootstrap the state of CometBFT upon installing a snapshot:

``` script

comet bootstrap-state          Bootstrap the state of CometBFT's state and block store from the
                               application's state

```

These commands enable the implementation of both the client and server side of statesync. 

> Namely, a statesync server can use `dump` to create a portable archieve format out existing snapshots,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Namely, a statesync server can use `dump` to create a portable archive format out existing snapshots,
```

minus the functions that apply the snapshot chunks (as this has already been done offline). 

### CometBFT based local state sync

Given that snapshot manipulation is entirely application defined, and to avoid pulling this functionality into
CometBFT, we propose a solution using ABCI, that mimics the behaviour described in the previous section.

On the client side, the main difference between local State sync done by the application and CometBFT is that the 
application has to perform the sync offline, in order to properly set up CometBFT's initial state. Furthermore, the
application developer has to manually bootstrap CometBFTs state and block stores. 
With support for local State sync, a node can simply load a snapshot from a predefined location and offer it to the application
as is currently done via networked state sync. 

On the server side, without any support for local State sync, an operator has to manually instruct the application
to export the snapshots into a portable format (via `dump`). 

Having support for this within CometBFT, the app can automatically perform this export when taking snapshots. 

> In order to supported local State sync, the following changes to CometBFT are necessary:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In order to support local State sync, the following changes to CometBFT are necessary:
```

1. Adding new configuration options to the config file.
2. Introduce a CLI command that can explicitly tell the application to create a snapshot export, in case 
operators decide not to generate periodical exports.
3. Extract a snapshot from the exported format.

> 4. Alter existing ABCI calls to signal to the application that we want to create a snapshot export periodically. 

Reviewer 5: (I realize this is explained later on in the text)

# ADR 104: State sync from local application snapshot

## Changelog

- 2023-05-05: Initial Draft (@cason)
- 2023-24-05: Added description of SDK-based & a CometBFT based solution (@jmalicevic)

## Status

> Accepted | Rejected | Deprecated | Superseded by

Author: ```suggestion
Accepted
```

network based State sync has proven to be fragile. 

### Positive

- There is a possibility to implement this in a non-breaking manner: providing an alternative and complementary
  implementation for State sync
- Node operators will not need to use workarounds to make State sync to download
  application snapshots from specific nodes in the network, in particular from
  nodes that are controlled by the same operators

### Negative

- Implementing additional ABCI functions is API breaking and might not be backwards compatible. 

### Neutral

- Additional complexity, with additional parameters for State sync's
  configuration and the bootstrap of a node
- Additional complexity, with the possible addition of a CLI command to save
  application snapshots to the file system

## References

- [State sync][state-sync] description, as part of ABCI++ spec
- Original issue on Tendermint Core repository: [statesync: bootstrap node with state obtained out-of-band #4642][original-issue]
- Original solution on Tendermint Core repository: [ADR 083: Supporting out of band state sync #9651][adr083]
- Original proposal ported to CometBFT repository: [ADR 103: Local State Sync Support][adr103]

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- SDK's implementation of local state sync: [local snapshot store management][sdk-pr2] and [CometBFT state bootstrap][sdk-pr1]
```

network, in order to address the above mentioned limitations, while preserving
most of state sync's operation.

The ADR presents two solutions:

> > 1. The first solution is implemented by the application and was proposed and 

Author: I would remove this `>` and render it a normal text block

> implemented by the SDK (PR #16067 and #16061). This ADR describes the solution 

Author: I would add links to these PRs.

in a general way, proividing guidlines to non-SDK based applications if they wish

> to implement their own local state sync. 

Author: Local or out-of-band? :-)

> 2. The second part of the ADR proposes a more general solution, that uses ABCI
to achieve the same behaviour achieved by the SDK.

## Alternative Approaches

> > This section contains information around alternative options that are considered

Author: This text is from the ADR template, we can remove in the final version.

> ## Decision

Author: I would maintain the previous content of this section, which provides a high-level overview of the proposed solution, to then include the observations you added.

As the SDK implemented a solution for all applications using it, and we do not have
users requesting local state sync that are running in production, we will not implement the generally applicable
solution. 

This ADR will outline both the solution implemented by the SDK, as well as a design proposal of a 
generally applicable solution, that can be later on picked up and implemented in CometBFT.

## Detailed Design

### Application-implemented local state sync

This section describes the solution to local state sync implemented by the SDK. An application can 
chose to implement local state sync differently, or implement only a subset of the functionalities
implemented by the SDK.

This solution exposes a command line interface enabling a node to manipulate the snapshots
including dumping existing snapshots to an exportable format, loading and deleting exported snapshots,

> as well as bootstraping a node's state based on a local snapshot. 

Author: Node's state or application state?

To be precise here, `restore` installs a snapshot into the application. Then the bootstrap command configures the node's state and block store accordingly.

The SDK exposes the following commands for snapshot manipulation:

```script

> delete      Delete a local snapshot

Author: Delete a snapshot from the snapshot store.

dump        Dump the snapshot as portable archive format

> export      Export app state to snapshot store

Author: I don't know whether you copied the description from the SDK PR. But here we are exporting a snapshot (not the application state, which can be in a newer state) from the application to the snapshot store.

Reviewer 2: I did copy it and export does that basically they export the application state to the store. It is essentially instructing the application to take a snapshot and put it in the snapshot store.

list        List local snapshots
load        Load a snapshot archive file into snapshot store

> restore     Restore app state from local snapshot

Author: So, "local" here means "in the snapshot store"?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I will add it to the description.

```

> and the following command to bootstrap the state of CometBFT upon a completed state sync:

Author: Not a completed state sync, but after restoring/installing a snapshot.

``` script

> comet bootstrap-state          Bootstrap the state of CometBFT's state and block store

Author: Bootstrap.... from the application state/height.

```

These commands enable the implementation of both the client and server side of statesync. 

> Namely, a statesync server can use `dump` to create a portable archieve format out existing snapshots,

Author: I believe that the operation is inverted here. The operator first `export` a snapshot to the store, to them `dump` the snapshot from the store to a file.

Reviewer 2: They do not have to be related. HEnce the 'or'. Snapshots are created anyways, and `dump` should get us those already created. `export` can just force the creation of a new one but `dump` is not dependent on executing it.

or trigger snapshot creation using `export`. 

> The client side, restores the application state from a local snapshot that was previously exported, using

Author: The client should first `load` a snapshot from a file to then `restore` it. The latter restore/install a snapshot from the snapshot store, while the first adds a snapshot to the store.

using `bootstrap-state` and CometBFT can be launched. 

There are three prerequisites for this solution to work when a node is syncing:
1. The application has access to the snapshot database
2. CometBFTs state and block stores are empty or reset
3. CometBFT is not running while the node is state syncing 

The server side of state sync (snapshot generation and dumping), can be performed while the node is running.
The application has to be careful not to interfere with normal node operations, and to use a snapshot store
and dumping mechanism that will mitigate the risk of requesting snapshots while they are being dumped to an archive format. 

In order to be able to dump or export the snapshots, the application must have access to the snapshot store. 

We describe the main interface expected from the snapshot database and used by the above mentioned CLI commands
for snapshot manipulation. 
The interface was derived from the SDK's implementation of local state sync.  

```golang

// Delete a snapshot for a certain height
func (s *Store) Delete(height uint64, format uint32) error

// Retrieves a snapshot for a certain height

> func (s *Store) Get(height uint64, format uint32) (*types.Snapshot, error) 

Author: `types` here is ABCI types?

Reviewer 2: I think here it is SDK specific, I had it on my todo to verify the types and make sure they are Comet consistent.

// List recent snapshots, in reverse order (newest first)
func (s *Store) List() ([]*types.Snapshot, error)

// Loads a snapshot (both metadata and binary chunks). The chunks must be consumed and closed.
// Returns nil if the snapshot does not exist.
func (s *Store) Load(height uint64, format uint32) (*types.Snapshot, <-chan io.ReadCloser, error)

// LoadChunk loads a chunk from disk, or returns nil if it does not exist. The caller must call
// Close() on it when done.
func (s *Store) LoadChunk(height uint64, format, chunk uint32) (io.ReadCloser, error)

// Save saves a snapshot to disk, returning it.
func (s *Store) Save(height uint64, format uint32, chunks <-chan io.ReadCloser) (*types.Snapshot, error) 

// PathChunk generates a snapshot chunk path.
func (s *Store) PathChunk(height uint64, format, chunk uint32) string

```

In order to dump a snapshot, an application needs to retrieve all the chunks stored at a certain path. 

**CometBFT state bootstrap**

In addition to managing snapshots, it is neccessary to bootstrap (setup) the state and block store of CometBFT

> in order for CometBFT to continue with block sync and consensus after state sync. 

Author: Actually, so that CometBFT can start properly. Notice that the `boostrap` command is an off-line command.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that s what I had in mind but will clarify it better.

At the moment of writing this ADR, there is no command line in CometBFT that supports this.
Thus application developers have to, within their bootstraping command:

- Create a state and block store

> - Launch a light client to verify the snapshot headers

Author: Not the headers. The light client is launched to learn the block header for the height of the snapshot.

- Use the light client's `State` and `Commit` functions to 

> retrieve the proper state, verify the `AppHash` and retrieve the `LastCommit`.

Reviewer 2: You are right the type is not LastCommit, but that is the last commit for the given height. Thanks for catching this.

- Save the retrieved values into the state and block stores. 

This code is essentially what the existing implementation of the statesync reactor does, once state syncing is complete 
minus the functions that apply the snapshot chunks (as this has already been done offline). 

## CometBFT based local state sync

Given that snapshot manipulation is entirely application defined, and to avoid pulling this functionality into
CometBFT, we propose a solution using ABCI, that mimics the behaviour described in the previous section.

Local state sync can be performed online, while CometBFT is running, by reading the snapshots from a 
predefined location. For this to be possible, this ADR proposes the following additions to the configuration file:

```bash
[statesync]
# State syncing from a local snapshot
local_sync=false 

> # Path to snapshot, will be ignored if local_sync=true

Reviewer 4: Agree

> # Path to snapshot, will be ignored if local_sync=true

Reviewer 2: :) yes

export      Export app state to snapshot store
list        List local snapshots
load        Load a snapshot archive file into snapshot store
restore     Restore app state from a snapshot stored in the local snapshot store

```

and the following command to bootstrap the state of CometBFT upon installing a snapshot:

``` script

comet bootstrap-state          Bootstrap the state of CometBFT's state and block store from the
                               application's state

```

These commands enable the implementation of both the client and server side of statesync. 
Namely, a statesync server can use `dump` to create a portable archive format out existing snapshots,
or trigger snapshot creation using `export`. 

The client side, restores the application state from a local snapshot that was previously exported, using
`restore`. Before `restore` can be called, the client has to `load` an archived snapshot into its
local snapshot store.
Upon successful completion of the previous sequence of commands, the state of CometBFT is bootstrapped
using `bootstrap-state` and CometBFT can be launched. 

There are three prerequisites for this solution to work when a node is syncing:

> 1. The application has access to the snapshot database

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is the same, I can clarify that.

**CometBFT state bootstrap**

In addition to managing snapshots, it is neccessary to bootstrap (setup) the state and block store of CometBFT to start up.
Upon a successful start, CometBFT performs block sync and consensus. 
At the moment of writing this ADR, there is no command line in CometBFT that supports this, but an [issue][state-bootstrap]
has been opened to address this.
Until it has been resolved, the application developers have to, within their bootstraping command:

- Create a state and block store
- Launch a light client to obtain and verify the block header for a given height.
- Use the light client's `State` function to 
verify that the `AppHash` for that block matches the `AppHash` obtained via
the call to `Info` (which is done on startup). 
- Use `Commit` to retrieve the last commit for the snapshot height. 
- Save the retrieved values into the state and block stores. 

> This code is essentially what CometBFT does as part of node setup, once state syncing is complete.

Author: ```suggestion
This code essentially mimics what CometBFT does as part of node setup, once state sync is complete.
```

as snapshot generation, dumping and loading a local snapshot would be built into CometBFT,
 while the node is running, we do not need to rely on a CLI for this functionality.

The `dump` command can be implemented in two ways:

1. Rely on the existing ABCI functions `ListSnapshots` and `LoadChunks` to retrieve the snapshots and chunks from a peer. 
This approach requires no change to the current API and is easy to implement. Furthermore, CometBFT has complete control
over the format of the exported snapshot. It does however involve more than one ABCI call and network data transfer. 
2.  Extend `RequestListSnapshots` with a flag to indicate that we want an exportable snapshot format and extend `ResponseListSnapshot` to return a 
path and format of the exported snapshots.

An improvement to the second option mentioned above would be to add path parameters to the command,
 and include the path into `RequestListSnapshots` instructing the application to generate a snapshot export
at a given location.

A third option is the introduction of a new ABCI call: `ExportSnapshots`, which will have the same effect as option 2 above.

#### *Automatic snapshot exporting*

> Applications generate snapshots in fixed time intervals. The application itself measures the time passed since the last snapshot,

Author: ```suggestion
Applications generate snapshots with a regular cadence (fixed time intervals or heights). The application itself measures the time or number of heights passed since the last snapshot,
```

and CometBFT has no role in instructing the application when to take snapshots. 

The State sync reactor currently retrieves a list of snapshots from a peer, who obtains these snapshots via ABCI (`RequestListSnapshots`). 

> Applications can thus themselves be in charge of dumping the snapshots into a given file format, the same way they generate snapshots.

Reviewer 2: Yes exactly, the app does it in the background.

 If `auto_snapshot_dump` is true, 
CometBFT instructs the application to export the snapshots periodically.

An alternative solution is that CometBFT, itself, using the implementation of the `dump` command, whichever 

> is chosen at the time, creates or asks the application to create snapshot exports. 

Reviewer 2: To export existing ones. Although the application can do things differently if we ask the app to export it. Otherwise, if comet is doing it, we are just asking the app for current snapshots.

**Export file consistency**

The same caveat of making sure the data exported is not corrupted by concurrent reads and writes applies here as well. If we decide to simply export

> snapshots into a compressed file, we need to make sure that we do not return files that with ongoing writes.

Reviewer 2: Yes exactly, the point is whether the exported file is complete or not. The  snapshots themselves are not of concern here.

An alternative is for CometBFT to provide a Snapshot export store with snapshot isolation. This store would essentially be pruned as soon as a new snapshot is written,
thus not taking too much more space.

If it is the application that exports the snapshots, it is something the application developer has to be aware of.

#### Syncing a node using local snapshots

On startup, if `local_sync` is set to `true`, CometBFT will try to look for an existing snapshot at the path

> given by the operator. The snapshots will be loaded and state restored as if they came from a peer in the current implementation. 

Author: ```suggestion
given by the operator. If a snapshot is available, it will be loaded and state restored as if it came from a peer in the current implementation. 
```

Note that, if it is not CometBFT that created the snapshot export from the data retrieved via ABCI (a combination of `ListSnapshots` and `LoadChunks`),
CometBFT might not be aware of how the snapshot was exported, and needs to ask the application to restore the snapshot.

If a snapshot was created using option 1 from the previous section, or the export format is known to CometBFT (like `tar, gzip` etc.), 
CometBFT can extract the snapshot itself, and offer it to the application via `RequestOfferSnapshot` without any API changes. 

If CometBFT is not the one who created the exported file, we introduce a new ABCI call `UnpackSnapshot` 
to send the exported snapshot as a blob of bytes to the application, which uncompresses it, installs it 
and responds whether the snapshot is accepted and the chunk application has passed. 

* **Request**:

    | Name            | Type    | Description                                 | Field Number |
    |-----------------|---------|---------------------------------------------|--------------|

>     | exportedSnapshot| [] byte | Snapshot export created by the application. | 1            |

Author: So is Comet that saves the snapshot to a file?

Reviewer 2: In this case no.. This call is reserved for reading an exported snapshot that comet is just reading in as bytes and sending to the app for parsing.

    Commit signals the application to persist application state. It takes no parameters.

* **Response**:

    | Name               | Type                                                    | Description                            | Field Number |
    |--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------- |----------------------------------------|--------------|
    | result             | [Result](../../spec/abci/abci%2B%2B_methods.md#result)  | The result of the snapshot offer.      | 1            |

>     | resultChunk        | ResultC                                                 | The result of applying the chunks.     | 2            |

Author: These should be multiple?

Reviewer 2: Actually no ,I think that if one chunk is invalid, we can't apply any of those so CometBFT should get a new snapshot export. Unless we want to expand the implementation to refetch individual chunks.

```proto
  enum ResultC {
    UNKNOWN         = 0;  // Unknown result, abort all snapshot restoration
    ACCEPT          = 1;  // The chunks were accepted.
    ABORT           = 2;  // Abort snapshot restoration, and don't try any other snapshots.
    RETRY_SNAPSHOT  = 3;  // Restart this snapshot from `OfferSnapshot`, reusing chunks unless instructed otherwise.
    REJECT_SNAPSHOT = 4;  // Reject this snapshot, try a different one.
  }
```

> Unlike networked statesync, we do not refetch individual chunks, thus if the chunk application of the exported snapshot fails, snapshot application fails. 

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike networked state sync, we do not re-fetch individual chunks, thus if the application of a chunk fails, then the application of the whole snapshot fails. 
```
